README.md, before:

# k3s install and setup

This repo contains the scripts and manifests to install and set up a
simple k3s Kubernetes cluster. Because I have to do everything my own
way, bit by bit, this repo will grow to take over any default set up by
k3s.

## Installing k3s

### Dependencies

* bash
* curl
* go 1.15
* jq
* make

Install these with your OS package manager.

### k3s binary installation

This repo has a `Makefile` and download script to download and install
k3s, instead of using the k3s-provided method of curl-downloading a
shell script and piping it into `sh` as root. It is not as flexible as
the k3s installation script, but I don't need it to be. Start installing
a k3s cluster with:

    make install

or

    make install-k3s install-k3s-links install-systemd install-dirs

To undo all that `make install` does, run

    make uninstall

Warning: This will delete any data in any local persistent volumes that
containers may have created, but only those you have configured with
persistent storage.

### Launching k3s

k3s is launched from systemd using the systemd service file in the
`systemd` directory. It is a service template and is installed as either
`k3s@server` or `k3s@agent`. The former is a master and node, the latter
is just a node. Currently it is only installed as a server.

k3s is started with some defaults hard-coded into the systemd service
file. It puts all the data in the `/opt/k3s` directory. k3s includes a
local path provider (https://rancher.com/docs/k3s/latest/en/storage/)
which is configured to put data under `/opt/k3s/pv`. You may want to
back this up to preserve persistent volumes used by workloads.

The install does not actually start k3s - start it manually with:

    systemctl start k3s@server

If you have re-run `make install` to install a newer version of k3s,
restart it with:

    systemctl restart k3s@server

### Configuration

When k3s starts, it puts a kubeconfig file in `/opt/k3s/etc` that
contains the connection parameters and keys/certs to talk to the API
server. A symlink for `kubectl` is installed in `/usr/local/sbin` that
knows to look at that kubeconfig file, but if other tools are used that
need to talk to the API server (such as kubecfg installed by
install-tools), you will need to setup your environment:

    export KUBECONFIG=/opt/k3s/etc/kubeconfig.yaml

Access to the kubeconfig file gives admin-level access to the cluster.
It is protected so that it is only readable by `root` and members of the
`adm` group. Add yourself to the `adm` group if you want to run
Kubernetes commands as a regular user.

## Service Deployment

### Installing Tools

Some extra tools are needed by the manifests to install them. They are
installed by running:

    make install-tools

This will install tools needed to install and use the services
installed in the cluster.

### Installing Kubernetes Services

Manifests in the `manifests` directory are for infrastructure services
that we always want in a new cluster. New services are added to the
`DEPLOYMENTS` variable in the `Makefile` and can be deployed by running

    make deploy

Some services may require additional one-time setup. They will add
additional deployment targets to the `Makefile` and be listed and
documented here.

`make deploy` can be re-run to upgrade any components that may have
changed in this repository.

### Traefik

If the traefik config file has been changed
(`manifests/traefik/50_configmap.yaml`), you will need to restart
traefik as it does not detect changes to it:

    kubectl delete pod -n traefik -l app=traefik

The Deployment controller will take care of starting a new pod after you
delete the existing one.

### MetalLB

The load balancer deployed to the cluster - MetalLB - requires a random
secret key that is generated by the Makefile and should not be
overwritten with a new random secret. `make deploy` is safe to run
multiple times and to upgrade versions if they change. It is not safe to
redeploy a new random secret in an existing cluster as it will break
existing deployments.

During cluster turn-up, run

    make deploy-metallb-secret

after you have run `make deploy` to deploy that random secret.

Commit message:

install: Make install directory properly configurable
Allow a `DIR=/path` make variable to be passed to install the k3s
directory tree somewhere other than the default `/opt/k3s`. This was
always intended to be the way, but it was not done properly.

README.md, after:

# k3s install and setup

This repo contains the scripts and manifests to install and set up a
simple k3s Kubernetes cluster. Because I have to do everything my own
way, bit by bit, this repo will grow to take over any default set up by
k3s.

## Installing k3s

### Dependencies

* bash
* curl
* go 1.15
* jq
* make

Install these with your OS package manager.

### k3s binary installation

This repo has a `Makefile` and download script to download and install
k3s, instead of using the k3s-provided method of curl-downloading a
shell script and piping it into `sh` as root. It is not as flexible as
the k3s installation script, but I don't need it to be. Start installing
a k3s cluster with:

    make install

or

    make install-k3s install-k3s-links install-systemd install-dirs

This will install to `/opt/k3s` by default. To change this, set the
`DIR` variable on the command line:

    make DIR=/srv/k3s install

To undo all that `make install` does, run

    make uninstall

Warning: This will delete any data in any local persistent volumes that
containers may have created, but only those you have configured with
persistent storage.

### Launching k3s

    systemctl start k3s@server

k3s is launched from systemd using the systemd service file in the
`systemd` directory. It is a service template and is installed as either
`k3s@server` or `k3s@agent`. The former is a master and node, the latter
is just a node. Currently it is only installed as a server.

k3s is started with some defaults hard-coded into the systemd service
file. It puts all the data in the `/opt/k3s` directory (or whatever
`DIR` was set to). k3s includes a local path provider
(https://rancher.com/docs/k3s/latest/en/storage/) which is configured to
put data under `/opt/k3s/pv`. You may want to back this up to preserve
persistent volumes used by workloads.

If you have re-run `make install` to install a newer version of k3s,
restart it with:

    systemctl restart k3s@server

### Configuration

When k3s starts, it puts a kubeconfig file in `/opt/k3s/etc` that
contains the connection parameters and keys/certs to talk to the API
server. It creates a symlink to that kubeconfig file as
`/etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml`. A symlink for `kubectl` is installed in
`/usr/local/sbin` that knows to look at that kubeconfig file, but if
other tools are used that need to talk to the API server (such as
kubecfg installed by `make install-tools`), you will need to setup your
environment:

    export KUBECONFIG=/etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml

Access to the kubeconfig file gives admin-level access to the cluster.
It is protected so that it is only readable by `root` and members of the
`adm` group. Add yourself to the `adm` group if you want to run
Kubernetes commands as a regular user.

## Service Deployment

### Installing Tools

Some extra tools are needed by the manifests to install them. They are
installed by running:

    make install-tools

This will install tools needed to install and use the services
installed in the cluster.

### Installing Kubernetes Services

Manifests in the `manifests` directory are for infrastructure services
that we always want in a new cluster. New services are added to the
`DEPLOYMENTS` variable in the `Makefile` and can be deployed by running

    make deploy

Some services may require additional one-time setup. They will add
additional deployment targets to the `Makefile` and be listed and
documented here.

`make deploy` can be re-run to upgrade any components that may have
changed in this repository.

### Traefik

If the traefik config file has been changed
(`manifests/traefik/50_configmap.yaml`), you will need to restart
traefik as it does not detect changes to it:

    kubectl delete pod -n traefik -l app=traefik

The Deployment controller will take care of starting a new pod after you
delete the existing one.

### MetalLB

The load balancer deployed to the cluster - MetalLB - requires a random
secret key that is generated by the Makefile and should not be
overwritten with a new random secret. `make deploy` is safe to run
multiple times and to upgrade versions if they change. It is not safe to
redeploy a new random secret in an existing cluster as it will break
existing deployments.

During cluster turn-up, run

    make deploy-metallb-secret

after you have run `make deploy` to deploy that random secret.
